# Data manipulation in R
This repository shows how I made some changes in data in R.
# About the project and dataset
In this project, i reviewed a scenario and focused on manipulating and changing real data in R using functions, statistical summaries to explore your data and presented  insights for stakeholders. The dataset is for a hotel booking company that was created after querying a database to combine two different tables from different hotels. This dataset contains information on hotel bookings. Each booking is a row in the dataset, and each column contains information such as what type of hotel was booked, when the booking took place, and how far in advance the booking took place (the 'lead_time' column). This activity will focus on using functions to conduct basic data manipulation. The link to the dataset is below.
# https://d3c33hcgiwev3.cloudfront.net/GL0bk8O2Sja9G5PDtko2uQ_31e445d7ca64417eb45aeaa08ec90bf1_hotel_bookings.csv?Expires=1705449600&Signature=OqDH20mgC2zfLHLehKu~s1IgdCDqYPV72d7UQQ2bH5hUCPLCjl9-AJnyEJv4SdpbxZsHweS~jQOmeqG2NRwpfQ7O4g2N3xXr7agbIojXLaErtRMFF2sDc7sznLHtNGAuMvojx8wjrvgP5JR9Wb26Nboq1WVRC-JPkXQY9sn4MB4_&Key-Pair-Id=APKAJLTNE6QMUY6HBC5A
# Description
Logged into Rstudio, installed the required packages 'tidyverse, skimr, janitor' and loaded the packages using the 'library()' function. I imported the data using the  `read_csv()` and saved it as a dataframe. Typed the file name in the correct place to read it into the R console. Next i got to know the data using the summary functions, the `head()` function to preview the columns and the first several rows of data, the `str()` and `glimpse()` functions to get summaries of each column in the data arranged horizontally and `colnames()` to get the names of the columns in the dataset. I proceeded to manipulate the data, I arranged the data by most lead time to least lead time because I want to focus on bookings that were made far in advance using the `arrange()` and descending functions. Checked it out by running `head()` again to find out if the highest lead times are first ( i create a new data frame that had changes saved using the assignment operator, <- , and Ran the `head()`to check it out beacause i Notice that i ran the `arrange()` without saving the data to a new data frame, which does not alter the existing data frame though). 
Next i found out the maximum and minimum lead times without sorting the whole dataset using the `arrange()` function. I did this with the max() and min() functions and specified 'which dataset and which column' using the $ symbol between their names and adding the data frame in the appropriate places. I proceeded to find out the average lead time for booking because my bosses asked how early i should run promotions for hotel rooms. I used the `mean()` function to answer that question since the average of a set of number is also the mean of the set of numbers( i also did this using the v2 dataset that included the `arrange()` function, i got the same answer because the `arrange()` function doesn't change the values in the dataset; it just re-arranges them). The bosses want to know what the average lead time before booking is for just city hotels. They want to focus the promotion they're running by targeting major cities. I created a new dataset that only contains data about city hotels using the `filter()` function, and named the new data frame 'hotel_bookings_city', Checked out the new dataset and checked what the average lead time for this set of hotels is. Next, the bosses wants to know a lot more information about city hotels, including the maximum and minimum lead time. They are also interested in how they are different from resort hotels. Instead of running each line of code over and over again, i decided to use the `group_by()`and`summarize()` functions (You can also use the pipe operator to make your code easier to follow) and stored the new dataset in a data frame named 'hotel_summary'. Checked out your new dataset using head() again. The link to the entire project on Rstudio is below.
# https://posit.cloud/content/7360888
# Summary
Being able to manipulate data is a key skill for working in `R`. In this activity, i used functions that allowed me to change your data, such as `arrange()`, `group_by()`, and `filter()` and statistical summaries to make insights into the data.I was able to also see how performing tasks is similar and different in `R` compared to other tools. 
